By conducting seminars and live drills at least twice or thrice a year. :)
Clean up and stop liotering
Taraman ang kataraning sa baranggay na mag ipos ipos para sa mga maabot na kalamidad sa kinaban.
giving disaster drills 
By sharing the news to each person in the barangay about the upcoming typhoon.
By preparing can goods
Thru seminars
By having disaster drills and planning disaster risk reduction.
By informing them about the upcoming disasters that will come
By giving sufficient information on what to do before a disaster happens.
Conducting a disaster drill!
By forming an effective DRRM council that will be a bridge of communication from authorities to the local citizens in times of disasters.
Talks or seminar about it.
Early dissemination of critical information.
By starting programs or seminars in the barangay that guide the residents on how to react to certain disasters. And of course
Our barangay captain together with her group should be active with the information dissemination regarding disaster.
Have drills occasionally.
Conduct gatherings or workshops that tackles disaster preparedness.
To update the citizens constantly about what is happening
They have a sound system that reaches the whole barangay so they can spread the word with ease.
by making drills in the vicinity
 Dapat pirmi igwa ki rasyon ki pagkaon asin tubig tapos pang inot na lunas tanganing may pang rahay pag may na disgrasya ta ang pag hahanda sa mga kalamidad ay nag pupuon sa harong asin pamilya
Every quarter the officials should run drills so that the people will be informed to where they should go. 
seminars
Proper orientation of the precautions to take before a disaster strikes.
By forming an effective DRRM council that will be a bridge of communication from authorities to the local citizens in times of disasters.
by conducting seminars quarterly to educate the people of our barangay
By conducting seminars in order to disseminate proper actions to be taken whenever disaster occur.
By conducting seminars in order to disseminate proper actions to be taken whenever disasters occur.
Giving Early Information and Good Evacuation plan
Give an updated list of contact numbers of gov't agencies like NDRRMC
Before the disaster or during the disaster
Plan a better evacuation procedure when a disaster occur..
Barangay can help people in a way where they can use technology to inform people through their phones (in which phones nowadays are almost part of everyone as a lifestyle) to give them updates
Convention and Seminars
Updating the people in the baranggay about upcoming disaster
Coordinated Planning before any disaster occur - mostly on specifying evacuation routes/center. Information dissemination will also work.
early announcement or warning.
Better equipments for life saving and early calamity warning system
Volunteer in Fund raising activities
By performing a exercise drill for all the people
Efficient & proper information dissemination
By implementing a SOS or Sandata o Sakuna mechanism
Early warnings of calamity
Maybe by sharing things i learned or experienced from the past and how did I overcome it
By always informing or giving us flyers to give directions and information on how should we react or respond to disasters. 
Provide a safe place
Drills
By saying safety protocols before the disaster
conduct seminars for the residents about disaster preparedness
By implementing a early weather advisory mechanism
proper information
By helping each other
Provide trainings and seminars
By using Early Warning Systems
By always updating my fellow citizens  whenever i heard weather news in redio or television and help each other in order to be prepared for upcoming disaster.
Through immediate open disaster preparedness forums and fast advisories about the incoming disasters would surely be of great assistance in having counter measures against possible threats of natural disasters and calamities. Having an open forum and educating the citizens in our barangay can serve as a medium towards attaining zero casualty and assure safety of everybody. 
Camaraderie
Camaraderie
Share our knowledge on how to prepare when a disaster is happening.
By doing some drills
Mag evacuate kahit hindi pa malakas ang bagyo.
Advance evacuation even the typhoon is not yet striking.
makinig sa balita
They have their own evacuation area where we can stay and they keep us up to date on news especially on typhoons.
Applying tips regarding safety
sumunod sa mga intructions at makinig sa mga balita
The barangay officials inform the people on impending disasters through word-of-mouth and social media platforms such as facebook. Also
Huwag mag magnakaw ng pondo para sa baranggay upang huwag mag ka problema sa pag bili ng mga kagamitan para sa mga di inaasahang kalamidad
Bago pa dumating ang kalamidad dapat ay maghanda at magayos. Una magtapon ng Basura
Listen to your barangay officials for what to do
weekly cleaning operation and avoid throwing trash into riverbanks
sa pamamagitan ng pag papatrol day before ng calamity  
follow the safety protocols posted by the barangay 
Thru mobile and social media
Work Together
by alerting everyone in the barangay and building groups of volunteer barangay members/residence to have a team of rescures
Help other people be informed about the risks that may happen
Inform them ahead of time.
constantly giving updates about the weather
Provide an emergency escape plan for the whole barangay indicating all the safe area to gather in the barangay and the place of the resources(provisions) we're gonna need in case of the disaster. Also they should provide all the emergency contacts in times of disaster.
seminars
Through having a communications and notices 
Through announcing every family that there are calamities approaching
No because the barangay is inactive
As a resident of the Barangay Bigaa
Seminars
Have an early announcement 
Evacuation Center
Our barangay conduct a disaster preparedness training. They also told us the numbers that we can contact during a disaster.
 They provide us the numbers that we can contact during a disaster.
By keeping them inform and be updated for incoming threat of our nature
makinig sa balita :)
Barangays can help prepare its residents in numerous ways. Preparedness Action Plans should be properly excuted once a typhoon signal has been brought up. Cutting down trees
Our barangay gives us latest updates regarding the weather
They should conduct a disaster preparedness program monthly
Our barangay can help me in preparing for a disaster by means of conducting drills and seminars in order to train and inculcate me the things that I need to do before
Going house to house of brgy.capitan to inform how the disaster will destroy thier home and lives if they dont follow
Our barangay can have programs and seminars that will educate every citizen on what to do in case a calamity hits our country. The barangay must also inform its citizens about updates on weather to keep them prepared. Drills must also be conducted in barangays to train every residents.
By implementing disaster risk reduction management plan
better coordination with the government units
By telling us what kind of disaster will be facing and telling us the locations of the nearest evacuation centers. 
Trainings
Give out flyers about disaster preparedness
By making a map to area’s evacuation routes and shelter locations
By contacting the community through SMS or an announcement on an online social group for reminders for safety and as a citizen of a barangay
I woyld help the LGU of Bacacay to implement activities especially seminar workshops that will raise the awareness of the people about risk reduction and disaster preparedness. 
I will support the Barangay Council together with LGU's in all the activities they will implement.
* Update news about the upcoming calamity"
The citizen must be evacuated as early as possible before the disaster strikes."
By giving us up-to-date information regarding the weather conditions affecting our area
They should gave informations needed by all people to keep safe in any disaster happen
By providing information on what to do and where to go when a calamity arises.
They inform us and told us to prepare for the disaster
Better drainage system
Information dissemination.
Help each other
Information dessimination
early warnings
early warnings
Joining in different campaign on Disaster Preparedness and help in facilitating activities that concerns the awareness for upcoming disasters in the area.
Research about the geography and history of disasters in our barangay
by being a good citizen example to the other people.
By helping and practicing preparedness before and after a disaster.
Help in informing the people the effects of climate change and the weird weather patterns that it creates
I will inform every people in our barangay about how we should prepare in every disasters
Make a disaster preparedness program 
The barangay can help me better prepare for a disaster by planning and spread information about disasters.
They can organize some orientation to teach the people some ways to mitigate negative effects of disasters.
They could help by giving us enough supplies to prepare for the disaster and give us news update about the disaster
Make a plan before the disaster strikes
We shall conduct an emergency meeting to the masses before the occurrence of the typhoon
The barangay could help me or everyone to better prepare for a disaster by giving important information in how to prepare in any disaster.
prepare a disaster plan and make an organization to your barangay to take action on it.
By informing the people about the bad effects to climate change and all the strange weather that it creates so they will be prepared
They can conduct seminars and drill about things to do before
By helping and assisting each other before and after a disaster.
They can conduct seminars and dripls before during and after a disaster
Through the proper dissemination on how should we do/what to do before
Seminar
Disaster Preparedness Training once a year
By conducting disaster preparedness seminars
They inform us the latest updates on the weather and they prepare the schools for evacuation purposes
Making sure that the facilities and our barangay is ready to help the people. 
Inform us early before disaster strikes
Our barangay can help me by launching Disaster Risk Reduction programs like earthquake drills
Information dissemination and solid plan on what to do before
Prepare a Barangay action plans for unexpected disasters and gather the people to relay the plan via seminars or Barangay meeting
By devising plans for disaster preparedness and create a barangay meeting or seminar to conduct these plans to the people within the barangay
Through Disaster Preparedness Plan that we can use in case of Disaster.
Prepareness for disaster is a big help in order to be ready all the time in case of emergencies. Our barangay could help every citizens to prepare by means of announcing what calamities or disasters will come through a speaker or siren. Conducting seminars could also be a huge help in  order to be alert in what to do before
Information Dissemination 
By showing and preparing different kind of disaster drills and exercises...
By preparing different kinds of disaster drills and exercises..
By giving us some reminders
Posting alert message or posters for incoming disasters.
Being active in the community policy making
Allow us to be inform as soon as possible if there's a disaster "
Giving some advices
Always update news on what's currently happening in the world/surroundings or in the place that we live in.
Be prepared always
Building seminars and youth camps every summer break that introduces fellowhsip/team building along with disaster risk management.
I can be better prepared if i am fully informed of the situation
by educating the people through seminars on how to prevent disasters and give them information on how to lessen casualties. :)
Conducting Seminar
Through programs that would educate us on what to do before/during disaster. Drills are included too so that we can imagine or visualize the scene and be prepared mentally for it.
By means of texting us early or any way of informing us as soon as possible and advising us what to do.  
By conducting trainings or drills and buying equipments that can help during a disaster. Information dissemination about the state of the barangay before
providing evacuation center and transportation for faster evacuating 
Early warning
Always prepared and alert. 
By always updating and informing us in a right time and giving us tips all about disaster preventions.
By doing some drills
No ways.
Early announcements of a disaster and preparing the foods
Help inform residents about incoming Storms 
Conducting Seminar
Our barangay could help us in the better preparation through the conduct of information dissemination or awareness campaign on the members of the households of the barangay.
Our barangay could help us better prepare for a disaster by means of making disaster drills
Drill
Drill
Our barangay always tell us the procedure to be prepare for a disaster. They make sure that the resident in dangerous area must be in the evacuation center before a disaster.
To those people who lives in the mountain they were informed that before the heavy rains begins evacuation is a must to lessen casualties. "
Our barangay teaches the people how to prepare emergency kits
*Updating and informing us about the disaster."
They must warn the people and address the problems immediately."
I will inform every people in our barangay about how we should prepare in every disasters, like giving some drills
"The barangay can inform everyone about happenings or any updates about the disaster.
Provide relevant information
"
Study Disaster Risks Reduction and Management.
Make a disaster preparedness program 
The barangay can help me better prepare for a disaster by planning and spread information about disasters.
They can organize some orientation to teach the people some ways to mitigate negative effects of disasters.
They could help by giving us enough supplies to prepare for the disaster and give us news update about the disaster
Make a plan before the disaster strikes, so the collateral damage will be lessen.
We shall conduct an emergency meeting to the masses before the occurrence of the typhoon
prepare a disaster plan and make an organization to your barangay to take action on it.
By informing the people about the bad effects to climate change and all the strange weather that it creates so they will be prepared
They can conduct seminars and drill about things to do before, during , and after a dissaster
By helping and assisting each other before and after a disaster. 
They can conduct seminars and dripls before during and after a disaster
The barangay could help me or everyone to better prepare for a disaster by giving important information in how to prepare in any disaster.
Practice the drills in before,during,after a disaster 
Early Warnings for incoming disasters as well as counseling towards better preparedness/disaster preparedness, and performing some helpful drills and guides
By giving information about disaster preparedness to people through different activities such as seminars and drills.
Attend seminars regarding the safety procedures during disasters.
In Having some community Drill ang making an evacuation center for all people
Once in a month having a Drill in every Disaster for us to know what we are going to do when a disaster hit
by conducting a seminar that will raise our awareness regarding to preparedness in disaster
Cooperate,inform,orient the residence of the barangay. 
Through the proper dissemination on how should we do/what to do before, during and after the disaster.This can be taught through the seminars or orientation.
Seminar
Disaster Preparedness Training once a year
By conducting disaster preparedness seminars
Hold seminars, discuss evacuation plans and have drills
Conducting disaster preparedness seminars and distributing equipment for qhen disaster strikes.
spread the location of our area’s evacuation routes and shelter locations
Attending some orientation on how to be safe during a disaster 
Seminars in disaster risk reduction
By giving us on time alert in an incoming disaster 
attending seminars for disaster preparedness
By participating seminar on disaster preparedness.
conducting disaster risk reduction seminars 
By conducting a seminar
They inform us the latest updates on the weather and they prepare the schools for evacuation purposes
Training people to respond quickly when disaster strikes
our barangay officials are well trained and we have an active community 
Prepare a Barangay action plans for unexpected disasters and gather the people to relay the plan via seminars or Barangay meeting
By devising plans for disaster preparedness and create a barangay meeting or seminar to conduct these plans to the people within the barangay
As a trained emergency responder I'll share my knowledge or train them especially the youths on what should they do when a disaster happens. And I can setup a radio communication system that are very useful in case of power blackout and its doesn't cellular networks for it to work.
Be prepared always, have a proper equipments in case of emergency.Be aware and always updated in the news. 
It must be important that they are always on the alert in case their is upcoming disaster.They should fully equip with the equipments needed.Coordinate with the local officials and Agencies in government, as well as the people in the community/barangay.And always listen on the news for the new updates in terms of preparing this situation and to be prepared.
Our barangay disseminates information clearly and on time. This is very essential especially before a disaster occurs.
"Proper Dissemination of Information.
-On time
-Accurate
-Reliable"
Unity of people in barangay in to gain awareness and officials must communicate well to the people 
By attending seminars about disaster preparedness.
Through immediate texting and seminars for disaster awareness
